1


2


3
Introduction to Nuclear Engineering Third Edition John R. Lamarsh Late Professor with the New York Polytechnic Institute Anthony J. Baratta Pennsylvania State University Prentice Hall -------- Prentice Hall Upper Saddle River, New Jersey 07458

4
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is on file. Vice President and Editorial Director, ECS: Marcia J. Horton Acquisitions Editor: Laura Curless Editorial Assistant: Erin Katchmar VIce President and Director of Production and Manufacturing, ESM: David W. Riccardi ".ecutive Managing Editor: Vince O'Brien Managing Editor: David A George Production Editor: Leslie Galen Director of Creative Services: Paul Belfanti Creative Director: Carole Anson Art Director: Jayne Conte Art Editor: Adam Velthaus Cover Designer: Bruce Kenselaar Manufacturing manager: Trudy Pisciotti Marketing Manager: Holly Stark Marketing Assistant: Karen Moon Cover image: Courtesy of Framatome Technologies © 200 1 by Prentice-Hall, Inc. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey 07458 The author and publisher of this book have used their best efforts ir preparing this book. These efforts include the development, research, and testing of the theories and programs to determine their effectiveness. All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, in any form or by any means, without permission in writing from the publisher. Printed in the United States of America 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 ISBN 0-201-82498-1 Prentice-Hall International (UK) Limited, London Prentice-Hall of Australia Pty. Limited, Sydney Prentice-Hall of Canada Inc., Toronto Prentice-Hall Hispanoamericana, S.A., Mexico Prentice-Hall of India Private Limited, New Delhi Prentice-Hall of Japan, Inc., Tokyo Pearson Education Asia Pte. Ltd., Singapore Editora Prentice-Hall do Brasil, Ltda., Rio de Janeiro

5
Preface to Third Edition This revision is derived from personal experiences in teaching introductory and advanced level nuclear engineering courses at the undergraduate level. In keeping with the original intent of John Lamarsh, every attempt is made to retain his style and approach to nuclear engineering education. Since the last edition, however, considerable changes have occurred in the industry. The changes include the devel­ opment of advanced plant designs, the significant scale-back in plant construction, the extensive use of high speed computers, and the opening of the former Eastern Block countries and of the Soviet Union. From a pedagogical view, the World Wide Web allows access to many resources formerly only available in libraries. Attempts are made to include some of these resources in this edition. In an attempt to update the text to include these technologies and to make the text useful for the study of non-west ern design reactors, extensive changes are made to Chapter 4, Nuclear Reactors and Nuclear Power. The chapter is revised to include a discussion of Soviet-design reactors and technology. The use, projection, and cost of nuclear power worldwide is updated to the latest available information. In Chapter 11, Reactor Licensing and Safety, the Chemobyl accident is dis­ cussed along with the latest reactor safety study, NUREG 1150. A section is also included that describes non-power nuclear accidents such as Tokai-Mura. iii

6
iv Preface to Third Edition The basic material in Chapters 2-7 is updated to include newer references and to reflect the author's experience in teaching nuclear engineering. Throughout the text, the references are updated were possible to include more recent publications. In many topic areas, references to books that are dated and often out of print had to be retained, since there are no newer ones available. Since these books are usually available in college libraries, they should be available to most readers. Chapter 9 is retained in much its same form but is updated to include a more complete discussion of the SI system of units and of changes in philosophy that have occurred in radiation protection. Since many of these changes have yet to reach general usage, however, the older discussions are still included. As in the second edition, several errors were corrected and undoubtedly new ones introduced. Gremlins never sleep!

7
Preface to Secon d Edition At his untimely death in July 1981, John R. Lamarsh had almost completed a revi­ sion of the first edition of Introduction to Nuclear Engineering. The major part of his effort went into considerable expansion of Chapters 4, 9, and 11 and into the addition of numerous examples and problems in many of the chapters. However, the original structure of that edition has been unchanged. Chapter 4, Nuclear Reactors and Nuclear Power, has been completely restruc­ tured and much new material has been added. Detailed descriptions of additional types of reactors are presented. Extensive new sections include discussion of the nuclear fuel cycle, resource utilization, isotope separation, fuel reprocessing, and radioactive waste disposal. In Chapter 9, Radiation Protection, considerable new material has been added on the biological effects of radiation, and there is a new section on the calculation of radiation effect. The section on the sources of radiation, both artificial and nat­ ural, has been expanded, and the sections on standards of radiation protection and computation of exposure have been brought up to date. A section on standards for intake of radionuclides has also been added. In Chapter 11, Reactor Licensing, Safety, and the Environment, the sections on dispersion of effluents and radiation doses from nuclear facilities have been con­ siderable expanded to cover new concepts and situations. Included in this chapter is v

8
vi Preface to Second Edition a discussion of the 1979 accident at Three Mile Island. The structure of this chapter has been kept as it was in the first edition in spite of the earlier suggestion that it be broken up into two chapters treating environmental effects separately from safety and licensing. Several errors that were still present in the last printing of the first edition have been corrected, including those in Example 6.7 and in the table of Bessel functions in Appendix V. We are indebted to many of John Lamarsh's friends and colleagues who helped in many ways to see this revision completed. Particularly, we wish to thank Nonnan C. Rasmussen, Raphael Aronson, Marvin M. Miller, and Edward Melko­ nian for their assistance in the final stages of this revision. Finally, we are grateful for comments and suggestions received from users of the earlier edition of this book. Although all their suggestions could not be incor­ porated, the book is greatly improved as a result of their comments. November 1982 Addison- Wesley Publishing Company Reading, Massachusetts

9
Preface to First Edition This book is derived from classroom notes which were prepared for three courses offered by the Department of Nuclear Engineering at New York University and the Polytechnic Institute of New York. These are a one-year introductory course in nuclear engineering (Chapters 1-8), a one-tenn course in radiation protection (Chapters 9 and 10), and a one-tenn course in reactor licensing, safety, and the environment (Chapter 11). These courses are offered to juniors and seniors in the Department's undergraduate program and to beginning graduate students who have not had previous training in nuclear engineering. Nuclear engineering is an extremely broad field, and it is not possible in a book of finite size and reasonable depth to cover all aspects of the profession. Needless to say, the present book is largely concerned with nuclear power plants, since most nuclear engineers are currently involved in the application of nuclear energy. Nevertheless, I have attempted in Chapter 1 to convey some feeling for the enonnous breadth of the nuclear engineering profession. In my experience, the courses in atomic and nuclear physics given by physics professors are becoming increasingly theoretical. I have found it necessary, there- vii

10
viii Preface to First Edition fore, to review these subjects at some length for nuclear engineering students. Chapters 2 and 3 are the substance of this review. Chapter 4 begins the considera­tion of some of the practical aspects of nuclear power, and includes a description of most of the reactors currently in production or under development. Neutron diffusion and moderation are handled together in Chapter 5. Moder­ation is treated in a simple way by the group diffusion method, which avoids the usually tedious and relatively difficult calculations of slowing-down density and Fermi age theory. While such computations are essential, in my judgment, for a thorough understanding of the fundamentals of neutron moderation, they are prob­ably not necessary in a book at this level. Chapters 6, 7, and 8 are intended to give sufficient background in reactor design methods to satisfy the needs of nuclear en­gineers not specifically involved in design problems and also to provide a base for more advanced courses in nuclear reactor theory and design. Chapters 9 and 10 deal with the practical aspects of radiation protection. Both chapters rely heavily on the earlier parts of the book. Chapter 11 was originally intended to be two chapters-one on safety and licensing, and a second on all of the environmental effects of nuclear power. How­ever, in order to meet a publication deadline, the discussion of environmental ef­fects had to be confined to those associated with radioactive effluents. When the book was first conceived, I had planned to utilize only the modern metric system (the SI system). However, the U.S. Congress has been more reluc­tant to abandon the English system than had been expected. Especially, therefore, in connection with heat transfer calculations, I have felt compelled to introduce English units. A discussion of units and tables of conversion factors is given in Appendix I. Most of the data required to solve the problems at the end of each chapter are given in the body of the relevant chapter or in the appendixes at the rear of the book. Data which are too voluminous to be included in the appendixes, such as atomic masses, isotopic abundances, etc., will generally be found on the Chart of Nuclides, available from the U.S. Government Printing Office. It is also helpful if the reader has access to the second and third editions of "Neutron Cross Sections," Brookhaven National Laboratory Report BNL-325. Title 10 of the Code of Fed­eral Regulations should be obtained from the Printing Office in connection with Chapter 11. I would like to acknowledge the assistance of several persons who read and commented upon various parts of the manuscript. I especially wish to thank R. Aronson, C. F. Bonilla, H. Chelemer, W. R. Clancey, R. J. Deland, H. Goldstein, H. C. Hopkins, F. R. Hubbard III, R. W. Kupp, G. Lear, Bruno Paelo, R. S. Thorsen, and M. E. Wrenn. I also wish to thank the personnel of the National Neutron Cross Section Center at Brookhaven National Laboratory, especially D. I. Garber, B. A.

